=head1 NAME

xde-desktop - a desktop environment for XDE

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-desktop> [I<OPTIONS>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Provides a desktop environment for window managers that do not support
one and provides a more consistent and rich experience for those that
do.

Like most desktop environments (typically file managers run in a desktop
mode), B<xde-desktop> provides clickable icons on the desktop.
Following the XDG specifications, it places items from the user's
C<$XDG_DESKTOP_DIR> or F<~/Desktop> directory on the background.  Unlike
most file managers run in a desktop mode, B<xde-desktop> does not
involve itself with setting the background image.  That is, the domain
of L<xde-setbg(1)>.  In general, B<xde-desktop> cooperates with any
background setting utilities using the root X window property,
C<_XROOTPMAP_ID>.

B<xde-desktop> can be run stand-alone and does not require the rest of
the B<XDE> suite to operate properly.  It is written in C<C> and relies
on L<GTK>.

=head1 OPTIONS

B<xde-desktop> provides a number of options.  None are required for full
and proper operation.  They are, however, as follows:

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

When specified, the following options alter the primary operating mode
of the program:

=over

=item I<unspecified>

When no command option is specified, the default is to run the desktop
without replacing an existing instance.

=item B<--editor>, B<-e>

When specified (or when the program is called as B<xde-desktop-edit>),
launch the desktop configuration settings editor.  This is the default
when called as B<xde-desktop-edit>.

=item B<--replace>, B<-r>

Run the desktop, but replace a running instance of B<xde-desktop>.

=item B<--restart>, B<-R>

When specified, ask the currently running instance of B<xde-desktop>
to restart.

=item B<--quit>, B<-q>

When specified, ask the currently running instance of B<xde-desktop> to
quit.

=item B<--help>, B<-h>

Prints usage information and the current options settings and defaults
to standard output, then exits.

=item B<--version>, B<-V>

Prints the version of the program and a brief copyright statement to
standard output, then exits.  Parse the first line with L<awk(1)> to
obtain just the version number.

=item B<--copying>, B<-C>

Prints the long copying permissions statement to standard output, then
exits.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

General options do not affect the major operating mode of the program.
B<xde-desktop> provides the following general options:

=over

=item B<--display>, B<-d> I<DISPLAY>

Specify the display to use (overriding the B<DISPLAY> environment
variable).  The default is the value of the B<DISPLAY> environment
variable.

=item B<--screen>, B<-s> I<SCREEN>

Specify the screen number to use.  The default is either specified by
the B<DISPLAY> environment variable (when that variable specifies a
screen); otherwise, all screens will be considered.

=item B<--desktop>, B<-e> I<DESKTOP>

Specify the desktop environment (DE) to use, I<DESKTOP>, e.g.
C<FLUXBOX>, C<BLACKBOX>, C<ICEWM>, etc.  The default value when not
specified is the value of the C<XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP> or C<FBXDG_DE>
environment variable.  See L</ENVIRONMENT>, below.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

As an XDG compatible application, B<xde-desktop> considers the following
environment variables when calculating the location of the user's
configuration file and the default configuration files:

=over

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>

When unspecified, defaults to F<$HOME/.config> in accordance with XDG
specifications.  B<xde-desktop> looks for user configuration files in
F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/desktop.ini>.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>

When unspecified, defaults to F</etc/xdg> in accordance with XDG
specifications.  XDE will prepend the F</etc/xdg/xde> directory to this
path if it does not already exist in the path.  B<xde-desktop> looks for
system configuration files in F<@XDG_CONFIG_DIRS/xde/desktop.ini>.

=back

The following additional environment variables are considered by the
program:

=over

=item B<DISPLAY>

Specifies the X-Windows display unless specified on the command line.

=item B<SESSION_MANAGER>

Specifies the list of transport connections on which to contact the
session manager.

=back

=head1 SIGNALS

B<xde-desktop> intercepts and acts upon the following signals:

=over

=item I<SIGHUP>

When B<xde-desktop> receives a I<SIGHUP> signal, it rereads the
configuration file.

=item I<SIGTERM>

When B<xde-desktop> receives a I<SIGTERM> signal, it writes its
configuration file if possible before exiting gracefully.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION

When B<xde-desktop> starts, it reads the configuration file located in
F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/desktop.ini> unless the configuration was
overridden with options on the command line.  If the configuration file
does not exist, it copies the first file that it finds in
F<$XDG_CONFIG_DIRS/xde/desktop.ini>.  When no configuration file is
found at all, it uses default settings and will write the current
(default) configuration to the configuration file.

All configuration keys can be manipulated using the GUI and it is
unnecessary to hand-edit the configuration file.  Format of the
configuration file is subject to change without notice, there should be
no need to rely upon it anyway.

=head1 BEHAVIOUR

When B<xde-desktop> starts, it creates a window that is the size of the
desktop and places it below all other windows.  To the user, it appears
as though it is the root window.  Scroll wheel motions (without
modifiers) are normally passed to the window manager by passing events
to the root window.  For some window managers, scroll events are
intercepted and used to change the desktop.  See L</WINDOW MANAGERS>,
below.

=head1 WINDOW MANAGERS

B<xde-desktop> supports all EWMH/NetWM 1.5, GNOME/WinWM and ICCCM 2.0
compliant window managers.  It even supports some plain ICCCM/Motif WMH
compliant window managers that do not support EWMH/NetWM or GNOME/WinWM
(such as L<twm(1)>, L<mwm(1)> and L<dtwm(1)>).  Tested window managers
and the idiosyncrasies handled for them are as follows:

=over

=item L<2bwm(1)>

L<2bwm(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<adwm(1)>

L<adwm(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<aewm(1)>

L<aewm(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<aewm++(1)>

L<aewm++(1)> is barely ICCCM compliant.  It does not really support
desktops and, therefore, only provides a single desktop.

=item L<afterstep(1)>

L<afterstep(1)> provides both workspaces and viewports (large desktops).
F<libwnck+> does not support these well, so when B<xde-desktop> detects
that it is running under L<afterstep(1)> it only provides a single
desktop.  (It has a desktop button proxy, but it does not relay scroll
wheel events by default.)

=item L<awesome(1)>

L<awesome(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<blackbox(1)>

L<blackbox(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<bspwm(1)>

L<bspwm(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<ctwm(1)>

L<ctwm(1)> is only GNOME/WinWM compliant and is not yet supported by
F<libwnck+>.  B<xde-desktop> mitigates this to some extent; however, use
L<etwm(1)> instead.

=item L<cwm(1)>

L<cwm(1)> is supported, but it doesn't work that well.

=item L<dtwm(1)>

L<dtwm(1)> is only OSF/Motif MWMH compliant and does support multiple
desktops; however, F<libwnck+> does not yet support OSF/Motif/CDE.
Nevertheless, B<xde-desktop> mitigates this to some extent by watching
the necessary OSF/Motif/CDE properties.

=item L<dwm(1)>

L<dwm(1)> is barely ICCCM compliant.  It does not work well.

=item L<echinus(1)>

L<echinus(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<etwm(1)>

L<etwm(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<failsafewm(1)>

L<failsafewm(1)> has no desktops and is not supported.

=item L<fluxbox(1)>

L<fluxbox(1)> is supported and works well.  Unfortunately, L<fluxbox(1)>
allows "desktop" windows to be moved with C<Alt+Button1>.

=item L<flwm(1)>

L<flwm(1)> supports GNOME/WinWM but not EWMH/NetWM and is not currently
supported by F<libwnck+>.  B<xde-desktop> mitigates this to some extent.

=item L<fvwm(1)>

L<fvwm(1)> is supported and works well.  L<fvwm(1)> provides a desktop
button proxy but it needs the B<--noproxy> option.  Viewports work
better than on L<afterstep(1)> and behaviour is predictable.

=item L<glasswm(1)>

L<glasswm(1)> provides some window control atoms of its own; however,
B<xde-desktop> does not support these at this time.

=item L<goomwwm(1)>

L<goomwwm(1)> provides some window control atoms of its own; however,
B<xde-desktop> does not support these at this time.

=item L<herbstluftwm(1)>

L<herbstluftwm(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<i3(1)>

L<i3(1)> is supported; however, L<i3(1)> does not support
B<_NET_NUMBER_OF_DESKTOPS>, so only the current desktop is shown at any
given time, which makes it less effective.  (This may have been fixed in
current versions of L<i3(1)>.)

=item L<icewm(1)>

L<icewm(1)> has no idea about changing desktops with scroll events
unless specifically specified in configuration files.  However,
recognizing scroll events is not the default configuration for
L<icewm(1)>.  B<xde-desktop> intercepts scroll events on the desktop and
makes this consistent with other window managers.

=item L<jwm(1)>

L<jwm(1)> does not consider its own panel when specifying
C<_NET_WORKAREA>.  I don't know whether I missed some "do not cover
panel" configuration item or whether it is a bug in L<jwm(1)>.
Nevertheless, B<xde-desktop> works around this problem by reducing the
height of the work area by 1/2 of an icon height.

L<jwm(1)> reverses the response to scroll events on the desktop.  It
moves left when others move right and vise versa.  B<xde-desktop>
intercepts scroll events on the desktop for this window manager and
makes this consistent with other window managers.

=item L<larswm(1)>

L<larswm(1)> is barely ICCCM compliant and is, therefore, not supported.

=item L<matwm2(1)>

L<matwm2(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<metacity(1)>

L<metacity(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<mvwm(1)>

Like L<fvwm(1)>, L<mvwm(1)> is supported and works well.  L<mvwm(1)>
provides a desktop button proxy but it needs the B<--noproxy> option.
Viewports work better than on L<afterstep(1)> and behaviour is
predictable.

=item L<mwm(1)>

L<mwm(1)> only supports OSF/Motif and does not support multiple
desktops.  It is not supported.

=item L<openbox(1)>

L<openbox(1)> has a strange idea for changing desktops using scroll
events.  Scroll events only change desktops within a row of the desktop
layout.  B<xde-desktop> intercepts scroll events on the desktop and
makes this consistent with other window managers.

=item L<pekwm(1)>

L<pekwm(1)> has a strange idea for changing desktops using scroll
events.  Scroll events only change desktops within a row of the desktop
layout.  B<xde-desktop> intercepts scroll events on the desktop and
makes this consistent with other window managers.

=item L<spectrwm(1)>

L<spectrwm(1)> is untested.

=item L<twm(1)>

L<twm(1)> does not support multiple desktops; however, it is supported
for a single desktop.

=item L<uwm(1)>

L<uwm(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<velox(1)>

L<velox(1)> is untested.

=item L<vtwm(1)>

L<vtwm(1)> is barely ICCCM compliant and currently unsupported: use
L<etwm(1)> instead.

=item L<waimea(1)>

L<waimea(1)> is supported; however, L<waimea(1)> defaults to
triple-sized large desktops in a 2x2 arrangement.  With large virtual
desktops F<libwnck+> gets confused just as with L<afterstep(1)>.
L<fvwm(1)> must be doing something right.  It appears to be
B<_NET_DESKTOP_VIEWPORT>, which is supported to be set to the viewport
position of each desktop (and isn't).  Use the L<waimea(1)> at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/waimea> for a corrected version.

=item L<wind(1)>

L<wind(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<wm2(1)>

L<wm2(1)> is barely ICCCM compliant and currently unsupported: use its
L<wmx(1)> derivative.

=item L<wmaker(1)>

L<wmaker(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<wmii(1)>

L<wmii(1)> is supported and works well.  L<wmii(1)> was stealing the
focus back from the desktop, but this was fixed.

=item L<wmx(1)>

L<wmx(1)> is supported and works well.

=item L<xdwm(1)>

L<xdwm(1)> does not support EWMH/NetWM for desktops.

=item L<yeahwm(1)>

L<yeahwm(1)> does not support EWMH/NetWM and is currently unsupported.

=back

=head1 HISTORY

I wrote B<xde-desktop> primarily because L<pcmanfm(1)> from the I<LXDE>
suite would not allow changing desktops with the scroll wheel for any
window manager other than L<openbox(1)>.  I started using L<idesk(1)>;
however, it leaks memory when the background pixmap changes and
eventually turns into a runaway.  I also tried L<fbdesk(1)>, but it was
not complete.  So, I wrote B<xde-desktop>.  Most of the ideas and
techniques were taken from the L<rox(1)> desktop: it is too bad that
L<rox(1)> is not XDG compliant.

The program was originally written in C<perl>, but was later rewritten
in native C<C>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock <bidulock@cpan.org>

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<getopt_long_only(3)>,
L<xde-ctools(1)>

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:

